REP 2003: Sensor Data and Map QoS Settings (#212)
ros-infrastructure/rep: rep-2003.rst

REP: 2003
Title:  Sensor Data and Map QoS Settings
Author: Steve Macenski <stevenmacenski at gmail.com>
Status: Draft
Type: Standards Track
Content-Type: text/x-rst
Created: 08-Nov-2019
Post-History: 30-Nov-2022

Abstract
========

This REP covers the standards surrounding Quality of Service (QoS) settings for common needs in ROS 2.
This includes sensor drivers and map representations to standardize interfaces of not only message types outlined by REPs such as REP 118, 138, and 145, but also QoS to ensure ROS 2 interoperability.

Specification
=============

Map Quality of Service
----------------------

> Map providers such as map servers and SLAM implementations are expected to provide all maps over a reliable transient-local topic.

Reviewer: I think you *need* to discuss map updates here, if nothing else than to draw a box around the [GCR](https://github.com/ros-infrastructure/rep/pull/212#issuecomment-553978699) formats you discuss here. You say "all maps" but that comment seems to point to just some maps. 

I understand that the representation is not part of this discussion, but there are separate message based approaches (namely [`map_msgs::msg::OccupancyGridUpdate`](https://github.com/ros-planning/navigation2/blob/e066ed1dee18daad2c6a95a49e5db4fc6407f77e/nav2_costmap_2d/src/costmap_2d_publisher.cpp#L77-L78)) for handling differently aged subscriptions. The last time I looked at this, the state of the RCL/DDS cluster was such that the [`onNewSubscription` functionality in the TODO here](https://github.com/ros-planning/navigation2/blob/e066ed1dee18daad2c6a95a49e5db4fc6407f77e/nav2_costmap_2d/src/costmap_2d_publisher.cpp#L70) was not (yet?) implemented, although that may have changed. 

The ROS 1 mechanism relied on being able to send a full map message to only new subscriptions, thus ensuring that you could subscribe ONLY to the full message topic and get the most up to date map. By saying that all maps should be transient local, are you also ensuring that all subscribers will always get a full update any time the data changes?

Reviewer 2: > The last time I looked at this, the state of the RCL/DDS cluster was such that the [`onNewSubscription` functionality in the TODO here](https://github.com/ros-planning/navigation2/blob/e066ed1dee18daad2c6a95a49e5db4fc6407f77e/nav2_costmap_2d/src/costmap_2d_publisher.cpp#L70) was not (yet?) implemented, although that may have changed.

As of Iron, the core supports this with the use of "Matched" callbacks.  See http://docs.ros.org/en/iron/Releases/Release-Iron-Irwini.html#matched-events .

Author: @DLu costmaps are not maps, so the costmap update topics are out of scope since those are collision avoidance/planning models and not environmental models that this REP is covering. The text is pretty clear in line about the scope that this is covering. But this is a good clarification to make:

- [ ] Explicitly restrict REP to environmental models, not to be confused with costmaps or other map-like structures for collision avoidance or C-space representation transportation

but also the OccGrid / Update topics have a stamped header, so it should not be challenging to disambiguate old updates to be disgarded. I still agree that Transient Local is the right answer even if we are using an update-structure. You wouldn't want (1) the main updated map to come in then start processing and wait on a polling basis for the `update` to come in, then (2) the algorithm could start planning with outdated data. Having it be event based on connection due to the QoS is still a preferable experience. There's certainly some technical decision making about how to handle the case, but this isn't a roadmap for map update schemes, this is a REP on the QoS to communicate them under. 

Unless you disagree that updates should be also transient local, [which we do today for for some time now](https://github.com/ros-planning/navigation2/blob/e066ed1dee18daad2c6a95a49e5db4fc6407f77e/nav2_costmap_2d/src/costmap_2d_publisher.cpp#L68-L79), I think this REP does not require further updates on the topic. Though, some other documents about how to process the updates could be useful to provide a general roadmap for end-users, I don't disagree

REP: 2003
Title:  Sensor Data and Map QoS Settings
Author: Steve Macenski <stevenmacenski at gmail.com>
Status: Draft
Type: Standards Track
Content-Type: text/x-rst
Created: 08-Nov-2019
ROS-Version: Dashing
Post-History: 08-Nov-2019

Abstract
========

This REP covers the standards surrounding Quality of Service (QoS) settings for common needs in ROS2.

> This includes sensor drivers and map representations to standardize interfaces of not only message types outlined by REPs such as REP 118, 138, and 145, but also QoS to ensure ROS2 interoperability.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This includes sensor drivers and map representations to standardize interfaces of not only message types outlined by REPs such as REP 118, 138, and 145, but also QoS to ensure ROS 2 interoperability.
```

Specification
=============

> Map Quality of Service

Reviewer 3: It may be worth describing what transient-local is for people who aren't familiar in this section.

Author: Good point

Author: Well, actually @mjcarroll do you think that a definition is really required on a standard? There's  documentation on ROS2 about what the settings mean in particular, the goal of this is to define the standard set of practices. I don't know that this is the right place to be teaching them about what are the QoS "basics".

Reviewer 3: I would be okay with a simple analogy or description on first introduction, something like:  
> reliable transient-local (which saves and re-delivers the last valid message to subscribers added later)

I only say that because googling "transient-local" isn't particularly informative and is a bit opaque for folks that aren't versed in the DDS terminology.

Author: > This is to allow for reliable transmission of map data and provide the map information to any new map clients without delay.

Doesn't that get the same message across in a more approachable way?

Reviewer 3: Ah yes, it does. Sorry for the noise.

Author: No worries :+1:

----------------------

> Map providers such as map servers and SLAM implementations are expected to provide all maps over a reliable local-transient topic.

Reviewer 3: local-transient vs transient-local elsewhere

> Map providers such as map servers and SLAM implementations are expected to provide all maps as over a reliable local-transient topic.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Map providers such as map servers and SLAM implementations are expected to provide all maps over a reliable local-transient topic.
```

This is to allow for reliable transmission of map data and provide the map information to any new map clients without delay.
The depth of the transient-local storage depth is left to the designer, however a single map depth is a reasonable choice for static or globally-updated dynamic map serving applications.

> Map clients are also expected to receive maps over a reliable local-transient topic with variable depth.

Reviewer 3: Same here

> Map clients are also expected to receive maps over a reliable transient-local topic with variable depth.

Author: "... however may use any QoS profile compatible."

> Map clients are also expected to receive maps over a reliable local-transient topic with variably depth.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Map clients are also expected to receive maps over a reliable local-transient topic with variable depth.
```

> This specification does not enforce any particular map representation but rather applies for all shared map representations including but not limited to occupancy grids, feature maps, or dense representations.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
This specification does not prescribe any particular map representation but rather applies to all shared map representations, including but not limited to: occupancy grids, feature maps and dense representations.
```

Sensor Driver Quality of Service
--------------------------------

> Sensor data provided by a sensor driver from a camera, inertial measurement unit, laser scanner, GPS, depth, or range finder are expected to be provided over a SensorDataQoS quality of service as provided by the implemented ROS2 version API.

Reviewer 4: Seeing as this is a generic REP: is this list exhaustive? Or are these just examples?

> Sensor data provided by a sensor driver from a camera, inertial measurement unit, laser scanner, GPS, depth, or range finder are expected to be provided over a SensorDataQoS quality of service as provided by the implemented ROS2 version API.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Sensor data provided by a sensor driver from a camera, inertial measurement unit, laser scanner, GPS, depth, or range finder are expected to be provided over a `SensorDataQoS` quality of service as provided by the implemented ROS2 version API.
```

This is to allow for unreliable transmission of sensor data directly from source to its first processing stage(s).
These processing stage(s) are also expected to receive a sensor reading using the SensorDataQoS provided QoS profile implemented by the ROS2 version API.

This specification does not enforce QoS settings for sensor data transmitted or received by stage(s) after the sensor driver.

Rationale
=========

Why Specify QoS Settings
------------------------

> Unlike ROS1, ROS2's QoS settings chosen by an application can effect the ability for data to be transmitted from a publisher to a subscriber.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Unlike ROS1, ROS2's QoS settings chosen by an application can affect the ability for data to be transmitted from a publisher to a subscriber.
```

> Unlike ROS1, ROS2's QoS settings chosen by an application can affect the ability for data to be transmitted from a publisher to a subscriber.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Unlike ROS1, ROS 2's QoS settings chosen by an application can affect the ability for data to be transmitted from a publisher to a subscriber.
```

> There exists several combinations of QoS settings that will not transmit data from one node to another even while composed in a single process.

Reviewer 2: I think as specified in https://github.com/ros-infrastructure/rep/pull/212#issuecomment-560525603 , this is too broad a claim and not specific enough.  In particular, I think we should say here that a reliable subscriber won't be able to talk with a best-effort publisher.

Author: @clalancette this is just explaining the motivation of the REP, I would think less detail is better so that if things change in the future, we're not trying to play catch up on semantic differences. There are tables in documentation explaining which things play well with each other, I don't think its the role of this document to explain them beyond the fact that such incompatibilities exist.

With that said, if you prefer an example, I can add one. Please let me know your final decision on it wrt this comment.

Reviewer 2: Thinking about it more, I agree with you that the details are too DDS-specific; different RMW backends may have different QoS incompatibilities.

So with that said, I think this sentence should be more like the following:

```
The may exist publisher and subscriber QoS combinations that will not transmit data from one node to another, even while composed in a single process.
```

Author: Sounds good to me

> This resolves subtle user issues of new sensor and map data sources not being communicated due to QoS incompatibilities leading some to believe a driver or package is not functioning.

Reviewer 5: QoS can be overridden via QoS parameter services or command line option depending on the use case and requirement, but I think having suggested standard QoS of sensor data for publisher and subscription makes sense. (Not so sure about MAP data...)

Author: Map data is in a similar category that needs some kind of standardization in order to make use. I can't tell you the number of ROS Answers / Robotics SE questions I answer with "did you change rviz' QoS for costmap/map to transient local?" and then they immediately close it.

Map information has always been `latched` in ROS 1, so this isn't a new standard, its actually just codifying what all ROS 1 & ROS 2 open-source SLAM, Localization, and Map Serving tools provide in the language of QoS (and by extension, I expect the vast majority of private companies as well since they build off of them / use at least one of them). 

Further, it logically tracks that maps should be persistent so that new nodes / systems that might be toggled on/off get a map on the event automatically instead of regularly publishing what amounts to many robotics systems' single largest topic (with the sole exception of 3D lidar scanners). That's a big efficiency gain and makes sure new systems can be stood up as quickly as possible instead of waiting

Why Not Specify Later Stage Sensor QoS Settings
-----------------------------------------------

> There exists numerous requirements and uses of pre-processed sensor data.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
There exist numerous requirements and uses of pre-processed sensor data.
```

It would be presumptuous of this REP to equally treat data transmissions in safety critical or best-effort pipelines.

> Backwards Compatibility

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Backward Compatibility
```

> 

Reviewer 5: can we remove this line? 2 lines here between the sections.

Author: Done

Specification
=============

Map Quality of Service
----------------------

Map providers such as map servers and SLAM implementations are expected to provide all maps over a reliable transient-local topic.
This is to allow for reliable transmission of map data and provide the map information to any new map clients without delay.
The depth of the transient-local storage depth is left to the designer, however a single map depth is a reasonable choice for static or globally-updated dynamic map serving applications.
Map clients are also expected to receive maps over a reliable transient-local topic with variable depth.

This specification does not prescribe any particular map representation but rather applies to all shared map representations, including but not limited to: occupancy grids, feature maps and dense representations.

This specification does not enforce QoS settings for map-like data for collision avoidance or planning, such as cost grids, which may have their own unique operating context and needs. This specification applies only to maps and environmental models, both complete and with partial updates.

Sensor Driver Quality of Service
--------------------------------

> Sensor data provided by a sensor driver from a camera, inertial measurement unit, laser scanner, GPS, depth, range finder, or other sensors are expected to be provided over a `SystemDefaultsQoS` quality of service as provided by the implemented ROS 2 version API.

Reviewer 6: IMO `SystemDefaultsQoS` is not safe to be used and it should be deprecated, rather than being encouraged in a REP.
Components should explictly declare their QoS and not rely on the underlying "system default" which are system specific and RMW specific

> Sensor data provided by a sensor driver from a camera, inertial measurement unit, laser scanner, GPS, depth, range finder, or other sensors are expected to be provided over a `SystemDefaultsQoS` quality of service as provided by the implemented ROS 2 version API.

Author: See the discussions above. This was a request from OSRF folks and I think its a sensible choice

> Sensor data provided by a sensor driver from a camera, inertial measurement unit, laser scanner, GPS, depth, range finder, or other sensors are expected to be provided over a `SystemDefaultsQoS` quality of service as provided by the implemented ROS 2 version API.

Author: We could call out what `SystemDefaultsQoS` means under the hood and I think that would be fine too (e.g. Volatile, Reliable, History depth of a user's choice).

Consumers of sensor data are to use `SensorDataQoS` quality of service as provided by the implemented ROS 2 version API.
This is to allow for unreliable transmission of sensor data directly from source to its first processing stage(s).

> This specification does not enforce QoS settings for sensor data transmitted or received by stage(s) after the sensor driver.

Reviewer 6: some sensor drivers may produce data only "on change" rather than at a fixed, usually fast, period.
these topics should use transient local reliable publication

Author: For example?

Author: That doesn't seem like raw sensor feeds to me, but the output of a node that is doing some pre-processing (e.g. stage). The REP calls out that we only consider raw sensor data and aren't covering between stages which might have other operating contexts. I think that should cover it unless there are actual "on change" raw sensor data inputs - which I can't think of an example of

Rationale
=========

Why Specify QoS Settings
------------------------

Unlike ROS 1, ROS 2's QoS settings chosen by an application can affect the ability for data to be transmitted from a publisher to a subscriber.

> The may exist publisher and subscriber QoS combinations that will not transmit data from one node to another, even while composed in a single process.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
There may exist publisher and subscriber QoS combinations that will not transmit data from one node to another, even while composed in a single process.
```
